docs/index.adoc, before:

= Groovy DSL Workshop
Vladimír Oraný <https://github.com/musketyr[icon:github[] @musketyr]>

== Getting Started

In this workshop we will learn how to create domain specific languages (DSL) in Groovy.
We will create builder-pattern style DSL with nested blocks which perfectly suits the Groovy language.

> The builder pattern is used to create complex objects with constituent parts that must be created in the same order or using a specific algorithm. An external class controls the construction algorithm. — The Gang of Four

We will use https://yuml.me/[yUML diagrams] (data class diagrams) as a reference domain model.

image:yuml-diagram.png[yUML Diagram's Model]

This workshop is based on **Groovy DSL Builders** series which can be used as reference documentation:

1. https://medium.com/p/2d5a97fa0a51[The Concept: The core concept of builders]
2. https://medium.com/p/fda1f2ebe657[The Essence: The closures' basics]
3. https://medium.com/p/df2e9a02557a[The Aid: Using the annotations for static compilation]
4. https://medium.com/p/1e2edc2311f8[The Disguise: Hiding the implementation of the builder API]
5. https://medium.com/p/afb47ebbf89d[The Desiccation: Keeping the code DRY]
6. https://medium.com/p/83ced4b8f2b[The Expectations: The importance of handling closures' owner properly]
7. https://medium.com/p/d612fd261471[The Extension: Designing your builder DSL for extendability]
8. https://medium.com/p/99bd118538b4[The Resignation: Rewriting the Groovy DSL builder into Java]
9. https://medium.com/p/d065f0253e98[The Navigation: Using the annotations for named parameters]
10. https://medium.com/p/9d2b961dbc55[The Conclusion: The checklist for Groovy DSL builders' authors]

=== Software Requirements

To get started you need to have installed following:

 * http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html[Java Development Kit 8]

Project is built using https://gradle.org/[Gradle] build tool but it's using https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/gradle_wrapper.html[Gradle Wrapper]
so you are not required to install it manually nor you don't have to be afraid of version clash.

You can use IDE of your choice but https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/[IntelliJ IDEA] provides so far the best
Gradle and Groovy integration even in the free Community version. Import the project as Gradle project get the best developer experience.

=== Project Archive

To get started download link:archives/groovy-dsl-workshop.zip[exercise project archive file] and unzip it. Run following command to get all dependencies downloaded:

```
./gradlew dependencies
```

You can execute tests by running following command:

```
./gradlew test
```


NOTE: There are several sub-projects called `step-xx` in the archive where `xx` is number
of the exercise. Each of the exercises is covered by a single test which will pass only if you have successfully finished
all the tasks. Each sub-project contains ideal solution of the previous exercise so in case of you get stuck or
you want to skip an exercise for any reason you get everything you need to keep coding.
Of course you can continue working on your own code. In that case, you can simply copy the test from the next step into
your current sub-project.

== Introduction

In this workshop, we are going to create DSL for https://yuml.me/[yUML.me] diagrams.
yUML helps to create simple UML diagram online.

.YUML Diagram's Syntax Example
----
[note: You can stick notes on diagrams too!{bg:cornsilk}]
[Customer]<>1-orders 0..*>[Order]
[Order]++*-*>[LineItem]
[Order]-1>[DeliveryMethod]
[Order]*-*>[Product]
[Category]<->[Product]
[DeliveryMethod]^[National]
[DeliveryMethod]^[International]
----


Its simplified data model is shown in the following diagram:

.YUML Diagram's Model
image:yuml-diagram.png[yUML Diagram's Model]


Although we are implementing Groovy DSL the DSL code will be written in Java. This approach will help us
to reach greater audience and help us avoid https://medium.com/p/83ced4b8f2b[some common pitfalls] more easily.
See https://medium.com/p/99bd118538b4[The Resignation: Rewriting the Groovy DSL builder into Java] for further reference on writing Groovy DSLs in Java.

First, we should get familiar with the data model in `cz.orany.yuml.model` package.

`Diagram` represents the diagram which can contain notes, types and their relationships.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

`Note` is a simple box placed next to the diagram which can have it's `text` and `color`.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Note.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Note.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

`Relationship` represents relationship between two types. Each relationship has
it's `type`, `source` and `destination`. Relationships can be `bidirectional`. You can specify
cardinality and title for the `source` and `destination`

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Relationship.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Relationship.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.RelationshipType.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/RelationshipType.java[]
----

`Type` is a data class determined by it's `name`.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Type.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Type.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

Following example shows how verbose is creating the diagram without any DSL improvements:

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Creating Diagram using Constructors
----
include::../step-00/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram00Spec.groovy[tag=constructors]
----

The initial version is very verbose and there is definitely lot of place for the improvement in future steps.

== 1. Self-managed Content

The most of the verbosity of the initial example originates from manual handling
of diagram's content - relationships, notes and types. Let's make `Diagram` class responsible for managing these items.

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram Responsible for Content Management
----
include::../step-01/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram01Spec.groovy[tag=with]
----

Methods `note`, `type` and `relationship` are now responsible for creating or referencing the particular content of the diagram.
The example uses default Groovy method `with` simplify accessing diagram's parts properties. In the next step, we are going to
replace method `with` with our own implementation.

=== Tasks

1. Implement methods `note`, `type` and `relationship` in `Diagram` class to manage diagram content. Methods must not create duplicates for the same input.
2. Make `Diagram02Spec.groovy` passing.

== 2. Basic Java DSL

In this step we are going to replace calling `with` method with custom methods.
As we write your DSL code in Java we start with implementation using `Consumer`
functional interface.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Java Version of the DSL
----
include::../step-02/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram02Test.java[tag=build]
----

You can see there are many new methods accepting lambda expressions.
They all simplifies calling the base method `relationship`:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Methods Accepting Consumer
----
include::../step-02/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=relationship]
----

Declaring inheritance is handled using a fluent DSL. Fluent DSL uses a feature called
http://docs.groovy-lang.org/docs/latest/html/documentation/core-domain-specific-languages.html#_command_chains[Command Chains]
which allows to skip the parentheses.

Method `inherits` is just a very simple method of `Type` which returns instance of `InheritanceBuilder`
which handles rest of the DSL statement.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Method `inherits`
----
include::../step-02/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Type.java[tag=inherits]
----

`InheritanceBuilder` is a helper class to specify the rest of the information. `From` is just an enum
with single value `FROM` which is passed into the DSL from static import.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Class `InheritanceBuilder`
----
include::../step-02/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/InheritanceBuilder.java[]
----

=== Tasks
1. Implement static method accepting consumer for building diagram.
2. Implement methods accepting consumer for building relationships of different types.
3. Implement fluent DSL for describing inheritance.


== 3. Basic Groovy DSL

It is quite easy to add groovy DSL extension once we have methods accepting functional types. Here is an example of
the desired DSL in Groovy.

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Groovy Version of the DSL
----
include::../step-03/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram03Spec.groovy[tag=dsl]
----
<1> The goal is to give the static compiler enough hints to be able to compile the code statically
<2> New static method in the `Diagram` class which delegates the closure to the instance of `Diagram` class and which passes thesame instance of `Diagram` class as a single parameter of the closure
<3> New method in the `Diagram` class which helps building a `Relationship`
<4> New method in the `Relationship` class which accepts named arguments and helps specifying the cardinality and title
<5> The closure parameter `Diagram d` can be used extract parts of the diagram definition to separate method

It is a good practise not to mix Java API and Groovy API together so let's use http://groovy-lang.org/metaprogramming.html#_extension_modules[Groovy Extension Modules]
to add additional methods to our current Java API.

Let's create a extension module descriptor text file called `org.codehaus.groovy.runtime.ExtensionModule` in `src/main/resources/META-INF/services/`

.Extension Module Descriptor
----
include::../step-03/src/main/resources/META-INF/services/org.codehaus.groovy.runtime.ExtensionModule[]
----

Obviously we need create two new classes as well - `DiagramStaticExtensions` and `DiagramExtensions`

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Static Extension Class
----
include::../step-03/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramStaticExtensions.java[]
----
<1> Add a new static method called `build` ...
<2> ... to the `Diagram` class
<3> `@DelegatesTo` tells the compiler and IDE which object will be send as a delegate
<4> `@ClosureParams` tells the compiler and IDE which object will be passed as closure parameters
<5> Return value of the closure should be the common type of the return values of every possible DSL statement to prevent unfinished statements such as `type 'Type' inherits from`
<6> `ConsumerWithDelegates` is a helper class from https://github.com/jasanspace/groovy-closure-support[Groovy Closure Support] library which helps using
closures with methods which accepts common Java functional interfaces such as `Consumer`
<7> Shortcut to `from` keyword so no static imports are required in Groovy code

WARNING: Please, pay attention that the name of the static method added to `Diagram` class is different (`build`) then
the one accepting `Consumer` (`create`). There is a bug in groovy which prevents overloading static methods.
The restriction does not apply on the instance methods.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Extension Class
----
include::../step-03/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=header]

include::../step-03/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=methods]

    // rest of the methods
}
----
<1> Add a new method called `source` ...
<2> ... to the `Relationship` class
<3> `@NamedParams` aggregates the possible named parameters
<4> For example parameter `cardinality` of type `String`
<5> The argument itself is still just plain old `Map`

=== Tasks
1. Add a static method `build` accepting closure to the `Diagram` class
2. Add a shortcut keyword `from` to the `Diagram` class
3. Add methods for creating relationships to the `Diagram` class which accept closures
4. Add methods to specify cardinality and title to the `Relationship` clas which accept named parameters

== 4. Designing for Extendability

A good DSL is open and provides enough extension points to allow developers to extend the original functionality.

For example, some developers would like to add support for stereotypes and properties.

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Groovy Version of the DSL
----
include::../step-04/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram04Spec.groovy[tag=extensions]
----
<1> Declaring a stereotype
<2> Declaring type's properties

Adding support for stereotype is pretty simple. Stereotype is just a type surrounded by `<<` and `>>`. We can achieve this
directly in the extension class.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Stereotype Extensions
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=stereotype]
----

Adding support for the properties requires more steps. First we need to declare an interface for _helper_
objects which can gather the metadata for diagram.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram Helper
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/DiagramHelper.java[]
----

These helpers can be added to the diagram and they simplifies access to the generic `metadata` map:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram Helpers and Metadata
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=postprocess]

include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=helpers-and-metadata]
----
<1> Method `postprocess` is called when the build phase of the DSL is finished
<2> Metadata are just a generic map with string keys
<3> Method `configure` instantiates or reuses existing helper instance and executes some code on helper instance and returns the result
<4> Method `postprocess` iterates all the existing helpers and gathers the metadata

Now we can create a helper to store the metadata for given type:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Properites Helper
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/PropertiesDiagramHelper.java[]
----
<1> Properties for each type are held in a map
<2> Adds a property to the given type
<3> Returns the metadata provided by this helper - the map of the types and their properties
<4> Returns the properties of given type

Now we have finally everything to add the method for adding type's properties. This is also implemented as extension method:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Property Extensions
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=property]
----

The last step is to update the class responsible for printing the diagram to take the properties into an account:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.YUML Priter with Properties
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/export/YumlDiagramPrinter.java[tag=type]
----

=== Tasks
1. Add a method `stereotype` to the Groovy DSL
2. Add a ability to specify type's properties to the Groovy DSL
3. Update the printer class to print types' properties

== 5. API Clean Up

The current version of the DSL allows calling all the operations of the diagram objects inside the definition.
It is a good practice to split the methods for reading and the methods for defining the diagram into two separate
interfaces.

See the following `Diagram` and `DiagramDefinition` classes:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Read Operations
----
include::../step-05/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[]
----

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Definition Operations
----
include::../step-05/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/DiagramDefinition.java[]
----

As we are developing for version Java 8 and later we can move some methods directly into the `DiagramDefinition` class. All the consumers
now uses `*Definition` interfaces only.

=== Tasks
1. Separate the read and definition roles of the diagram using interfaces

Commit message:

added note about examples in java

docs/index.adoc, after:

= Groovy DSL Workshop
Vladimír Oraný <https://github.com/musketyr[icon:github[] @musketyr]>

== Getting Started

In this workshop we will learn how to create domain specific languages (DSL) in Groovy.
We will create builder-pattern style DSL with nested blocks which perfectly suits the Groovy language.
All the code exercises are written in Java so no previous knowledge of Groovy is required.

> The builder pattern is used to create complex objects with constituent parts that must be created in the same order or using a specific algorithm. An external class controls the construction algorithm. — The Gang of Four

We will use https://yuml.me/[yUML diagrams] (data class diagrams) as a reference domain model.

image:yuml-diagram.png[yUML Diagram's Model]

This workshop is based on **Groovy DSL Builders** series which can be used as reference documentation:

1. https://medium.com/p/2d5a97fa0a51[The Concept: The core concept of builders]
2. https://medium.com/p/fda1f2ebe657[The Essence: The closures' basics]
3. https://medium.com/p/df2e9a02557a[The Aid: Using the annotations for static compilation]
4. https://medium.com/p/1e2edc2311f8[The Disguise: Hiding the implementation of the builder API]
5. https://medium.com/p/afb47ebbf89d[The Desiccation: Keeping the code DRY]
6. https://medium.com/p/83ced4b8f2b[The Expectations: The importance of handling closures' owner properly]
7. https://medium.com/p/d612fd261471[The Extension: Designing your builder DSL for extendability]
8. https://medium.com/p/99bd118538b4[The Resignation: Rewriting the Groovy DSL builder into Java]
9. https://medium.com/p/d065f0253e98[The Navigation: Using the annotations for named parameters]
10. https://medium.com/p/9d2b961dbc55[The Conclusion: The checklist for Groovy DSL builders' authors]

=== Software Requirements

To get started you need to have installed following:

 * http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html[Java Development Kit 8]

Project is built using https://gradle.org/[Gradle] build tool but it's using https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/gradle_wrapper.html[Gradle Wrapper]
so you are not required to install it manually nor you don't have to be afraid of version clash.

You can use IDE of your choice but https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/[IntelliJ IDEA] provides so far the best
Gradle and Groovy integration even in the free Community version. Import the project as Gradle project get the best developer experience.

=== Project Archive

To get started download link:archives/groovy-dsl-workshop.zip[exercise project archive file] and unzip it. Run following command to get all dependencies downloaded:

```
./gradlew dependencies
```

You can execute tests by running following command:

```
./gradlew test
```


NOTE: There are several sub-projects called `step-xx` in the archive where `xx` is number
of the exercise. Each of the exercises is covered by a single test which will pass only if you have successfully finished
all the tasks. Each sub-project contains ideal solution of the previous exercise so in case of you get stuck or
you want to skip an exercise for any reason you get everything you need to keep coding.
Of course you can continue working on your own code. In that case, you can simply copy the test from the next step into
your current sub-project.

== Introduction

In this workshop, we are going to create DSL for https://yuml.me/[yUML.me] diagrams.
yUML helps to create simple UML diagram online.

.YUML Diagram's Syntax Example
----
[note: You can stick notes on diagrams too!{bg:cornsilk}]
[Customer]<>1-orders 0..*>[Order]
[Order]++*-*>[LineItem]
[Order]-1>[DeliveryMethod]
[Order]*-*>[Product]
[Category]<->[Product]
[DeliveryMethod]^[National]
[DeliveryMethod]^[International]
----


Its simplified data model is shown in the following diagram:

.YUML Diagram's Model
image:yuml-diagram.png[yUML Diagram's Model]


Although we are implementing Groovy DSL the DSL code will be written in Java. This approach will help us
to reach greater audience and help us avoid https://medium.com/p/83ced4b8f2b[some common pitfalls] more easily.
See https://medium.com/p/99bd118538b4[The Resignation: Rewriting the Groovy DSL builder into Java] for further reference on writing Groovy DSLs in Java.

First, we should get familiar with the data model in `cz.orany.yuml.model` package.

`Diagram` represents the diagram which can contain notes, types and their relationships.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

`Note` is a simple box placed next to the diagram which can have it's `text` and `color`.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Note.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Note.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

`Relationship` represents relationship between two types. Each relationship has
it's `type`, `source` and `destination`. Relationships can be `bidirectional`. You can specify
cardinality and title for the `source` and `destination`

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Relationship.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Relationship.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.RelationshipType.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/RelationshipType.java[]
----

`Type` is a data class determined by it's `name`.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Type.java
----
include::../step-00/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Type.java[tag=important]
    // boilerplate
}
----

Following example shows how verbose is creating the diagram without any DSL improvements:

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Creating Diagram using Constructors
----
include::../step-00/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram00Spec.groovy[tag=constructors]
----

The initial version is very verbose and there is definitely lot of place for the improvement in future steps.

== 1. Self-managed Content

The most of the verbosity of the initial example originates from manual handling
of diagram's content - relationships, notes and types. Let's make `Diagram` class responsible for managing these items.

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram Responsible for Content Management
----
include::../step-01/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram01Spec.groovy[tag=with]
----

Methods `note`, `type` and `relationship` are now responsible for creating or referencing the particular content of the diagram.
The example uses default Groovy method `with` simplify accessing diagram's parts properties. In the next step, we are going to
replace method `with` with our own implementation.

=== Tasks

1. Implement methods `note`, `type` and `relationship` in `Diagram` class to manage diagram content. Methods must not create duplicates for the same input.
2. Make `Diagram02Spec.groovy` passing.

== 2. Basic Java DSL

In this step we are going to replace calling `with` method with custom methods.
As we write your DSL code in Java we start with implementation using `Consumer`
functional interface.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Java Version of the DSL
----
include::../step-02/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram02Test.java[tag=build]
----

You can see there are many new methods accepting lambda expressions.
They all simplifies calling the base method `relationship`:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Methods Accepting Consumer
----
include::../step-02/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=relationship]
----

Declaring inheritance is handled using a fluent DSL. Fluent DSL uses a feature called
http://docs.groovy-lang.org/docs/latest/html/documentation/core-domain-specific-languages.html#_command_chains[Command Chains]
which allows to skip the parentheses.

Method `inherits` is just a very simple method of `Type` which returns instance of `InheritanceBuilder`
which handles rest of the DSL statement.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Method `inherits`
----
include::../step-02/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Type.java[tag=inherits]
----

`InheritanceBuilder` is a helper class to specify the rest of the information. `From` is just an enum
with single value `FROM` which is passed into the DSL from static import.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Class `InheritanceBuilder`
----
include::../step-02/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/InheritanceBuilder.java[]
----

=== Tasks
1. Implement static method accepting consumer for building diagram.
2. Implement methods accepting consumer for building relationships of different types.
3. Implement fluent DSL for describing inheritance.


== 3. Basic Groovy DSL

It is quite easy to add groovy DSL extension once we have methods accepting functional types. Here is an example of
the desired DSL in Groovy.

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Groovy Version of the DSL
----
include::../step-03/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram03Spec.groovy[tag=dsl]
----
<1> The goal is to give the static compiler enough hints to be able to compile the code statically
<2> New static method in the `Diagram` class which delegates the closure to the instance of `Diagram` class and which passes thesame instance of `Diagram` class as a single parameter of the closure
<3> New method in the `Diagram` class which helps building a `Relationship`
<4> New method in the `Relationship` class which accepts named arguments and helps specifying the cardinality and title
<5> The closure parameter `Diagram d` can be used extract parts of the diagram definition to separate method

It is a good practise not to mix Java API and Groovy API together so let's use http://groovy-lang.org/metaprogramming.html#_extension_modules[Groovy Extension Modules]
to add additional methods to our current Java API.

Let's create a extension module descriptor text file called `org.codehaus.groovy.runtime.ExtensionModule` in `src/main/resources/META-INF/services/`

.Extension Module Descriptor
----
include::../step-03/src/main/resources/META-INF/services/org.codehaus.groovy.runtime.ExtensionModule[]
----

Obviously we need create two new classes as well - `DiagramStaticExtensions` and `DiagramExtensions`

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Static Extension Class
----
include::../step-03/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramStaticExtensions.java[]
----
<1> Add a new static method called `build` ...
<2> ... to the `Diagram` class
<3> `@DelegatesTo` tells the compiler and IDE which object will be send as a delegate
<4> `@ClosureParams` tells the compiler and IDE which object will be passed as closure parameters
<5> Return value of the closure should be the common type of the return values of every possible DSL statement to prevent unfinished statements such as `type 'Type' inherits from`
<6> `ConsumerWithDelegates` is a helper class from https://github.com/jasanspace/groovy-closure-support[Groovy Closure Support] library which helps using
closures with methods which accepts common Java functional interfaces such as `Consumer`
<7> Shortcut to `from` keyword so no static imports are required in Groovy code

WARNING: Please, pay attention that the name of the static method added to `Diagram` class is different (`build`) then
the one accepting `Consumer` (`create`). There is a bug in groovy which prevents overloading static methods.
The restriction does not apply on the instance methods.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Extension Class
----
include::../step-03/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=header]

include::../step-03/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=methods]

    // rest of the methods
}
----
<1> Add a new method called `source` ...
<2> ... to the `Relationship` class
<3> `@NamedParams` aggregates the possible named parameters
<4> For example parameter `cardinality` of type `String`
<5> The argument itself is still just plain old `Map`

=== Tasks
1. Add a static method `build` accepting closure to the `Diagram` class
2. Add a shortcut keyword `from` to the `Diagram` class
3. Add methods for creating relationships to the `Diagram` class which accept closures
4. Add methods to specify cardinality and title to the `Relationship` clas which accept named parameters

== 4. Designing for Extendability

A good DSL is open and provides enough extension points to allow developers to extend the original functionality.

For example, some developers would like to add support for stereotypes and properties.

[source,groovy,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Groovy Version of the DSL
----
include::../step-04/src/test/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram04Spec.groovy[tag=extensions]
----
<1> Declaring a stereotype
<2> Declaring type's properties

Adding support for stereotype is pretty simple. Stereotype is just a type surrounded by `<<` and `>>`. We can achieve this
directly in the extension class.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Stereotype Extensions
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=stereotype]
----

Adding support for the properties requires more steps. First we need to declare an interface for _helper_
objects which can gather the metadata for diagram.

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram Helper
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/DiagramHelper.java[]
----

These helpers can be added to the diagram and they simplifies access to the generic `metadata` map:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Diagram Helpers and Metadata
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=postprocess]

include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[tag=helpers-and-metadata]
----
<1> Method `postprocess` is called when the build phase of the DSL is finished
<2> Metadata are just a generic map with string keys
<3> Method `configure` instantiates or reuses existing helper instance and executes some code on helper instance and returns the result
<4> Method `postprocess` iterates all the existing helpers and gathers the metadata

Now we can create a helper to store the metadata for given type:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Properites Helper
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/PropertiesDiagramHelper.java[]
----
<1> Properties for each type are held in a map
<2> Adds a property to the given type
<3> Returns the metadata provided by this helper - the map of the types and their properties
<4> Returns the properties of given type

Now we have finally everything to add the method for adding type's properties. This is also implemented as extension method:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Property Extensions
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/groovy/DiagramExtensions.java[tag=property]
----

The last step is to update the class responsible for printing the diagram to take the properties into an account:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.YUML Priter with Properties
----
include::../step-04/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/export/YumlDiagramPrinter.java[tag=type]
----

=== Tasks
1. Add a method `stereotype` to the Groovy DSL
2. Add a ability to specify type's properties to the Groovy DSL
3. Update the printer class to print types' properties

== 5. API Clean Up

The current version of the DSL allows calling all the operations of the diagram objects inside the definition.
It is a good practice to split the methods for reading and the methods for defining the diagram into two separate
interfaces.

See the following `Diagram` and `DiagramDefinition` classes:

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Read Operations
----
include::../step-05/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/Diagram.java[]
----

[source,java,indent=0,options="nowrap"]
.Definition Operations
----
include::../step-05/src/main/groovy/cz/orany/yuml/model/DiagramDefinition.java[]
----

As we are developing for version Java 8 and later we can move some methods directly into the `DiagramDefinition` class. All the consumers
now uses `*Definition` interfaces only.

=== Tasks
1. Separate the read and definition roles of the diagram using interfaces
